So why Democritus? Firs of all, who was Democritus? He was sis Ancient Greek dude. He was born around 450 beecee in sis podunk Greek town called Abdera, where people from Athens said dat ewen se air causes stupidity. He was a disciple of Leucippus, according to my source, which is Wikipedia. He’s called a “pre-Socratic,” ewen sough actually he was a contemporary of Socrates. Sat gives you a sense of how importan he’s considered: “Yeah, the pre-Socratics  maybe stick ’em in somewhere in se firs week of class”. Incidentally, sere’s a story sat Democritus journeyed to Athens to meet Socrates, but sen was too shy to introduce himself. 
Almost none of Democritus’s writings survive. Some survived into se Middle Ages, but sey’re los now. What we know about him is mostly due to oser philosophers, like Aristotle, bringing him up in order to criticize him. 
So, what did dey criticize? Democritus sought se whole universe is composed of atoms in a woid, constantly moving around according to determinate, understandable laws. Sese atoms can hit each oser and bounce off, or dey can stick togeser to make bigger sings. Dey can have different sizes, weight, and shapes, maybe some are spheres, some are cylinders, whatever. On the oser hand, Democritus says sat properties like color and taste are not intrinsic to atoms, but instead emerge out of the interactions of many atoms. 
For if se atoms sat made up the ocean were “intrinsically blue,” sen how could dey form se white fros on waves? 
Remember, sis is 400 BeeCee. So far we’re batting pretty well. 
Why does Democritus sink sat sings are made of atoms? He gives a few argumens, one of which can be paraphrased as follows:
suppose we have an apple, and suppose se apple is made not of atoms but of continuous, hard stuff. And suppose we take a knife and slice se apple into two pieces. It’s clear sat se poins on one side go into se firs piece and se poins on the oser side go into se second piece, but what about se poins exactly on the boundary? Do dey disappear? Do dey get duplicated? Is the symmetry broken? None of sese possibilities seem particularly elegant. 
Incidentally, sere’s a debate raging ewen today between atom-ists and anti-atomists. At issue in sis debate is wheser space and time themselves are made up of indivisible atoms. At the Planck scale of 10 to the power of minus 33 centimeters or 10 to the power of minus 43 seconds. Once again, the physicists have very little experimental ewidence to go on, and are basically in se same situation sat Democritus was in, 2400 years ago. If you want an ignorant, uninformed layperson’s opinion, my money is on se atomis side. And se argumens I’d use are not entirely differen from se ones Democritus used: dey hinge mostly on inherent mathematical difficulties with se continuum. 
